Source: CRNT DESIGNERS -- "Blender Hard Surface Modeling | Blender Tutorial | 01 | Boolean On Triangle"
video_id: EY6C1SnGVFg, url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EY6C1SnGVFg
Fetched via TubeAlfred youtube_video_transcript, 2026-08-14. Curriculum entry 8 (Level 2).
Full transcript_only_text field, English auto-generated captions (heavily garbled -- narrator's English is a second language and captions mis-transcribe several words), ~11:21 duration.

NOTE on content value: narration is fast, fragmented, and light on stated reasoning ("why") -- most sentences are terse tool commands ("select these faces and move them", "add a loop cut") without explanation. Per the curriculum's own selection rules this is lower-value than videos that explain why. Two genuinely transferable, clearly-stated items were extracted; the rest of the video is asset-specific button-mashing not worth encoding as general knowledge.

hey guys welcome to CR entities here and in this tutorial we are going to do creative hard surface modeling so now let's get started to make this model we need to add cylinder so add a cylinder make sure vertex should be 8 and change it to the triangle fan then delete its bottom words and then select this mid Edge and then add a bevel on this center edge like this then you need to select the spaces and then move them faces along the y-axis and select these faces and then move them along the y axis and you will get this kind of shape then press I to insert like this and you can see this face will be the Boolean part so select the outer edge and extrude it and scale it and just maintain the scale from all sides same equals portion of scale... this is the creative process tutorial just try to improve your creativity take a simple objects and try to create something different from them... now select both part and then join them... select this everything and smash and then symmetrize make sure you should apply your location and rotation before taking the symmetry that mistake I did here before then I realized I didn't apply the location and rotation so that's why you need to apply the low location and rotation on your mesh then you will be able to get the proper symmetry for your mesh so that's why you need to press Ctrl a... okay now you need to take the Symmetry and here also the most important thing while applying the symmetry apply the location and rotation so you can see my origin should be in the at 3D cursor or at the center of the mesh and then you can get the right shape so Ctrl a i guess to apply the location and rotation and then you can see the face normal those face normal should be also right then select these faces and then extrude them and move them along the z-axis like this and you can see we have easily created the Boolean this is the right process of creating Boolean like this then you can add a subdue surface modifier so just add the sub demodifier and increase its level so you will get this kind of proper shape...
